Add TUF update guide (#7368)
fleetdm/fleet: orbit/docs/TUF-Update-Guide.md

# TUF Update Guide

This document is a walkthrough guide for:
- A Fleet member to become a publisher of updates for [Fleet's TUF service](tuf.fleetctl.com).
- A Fleet member to publish new updates to [Fleet's TUF service](tuf.fleetctl.com). 

> > The roles needed to push new updates are `targets`, `snapshot` and `timestamp`. See [Roles and Metadata](https://theupdateframework.io/metadata/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> The roles needed to push new updates are `targets`, `snapshot`, and `timestamp`. See [Roles and Metadata](https://theupdateframework.io/metadata/).
```

## Become a New Fleet Publisher

### Security

> - TUF keys for `targets`, `snapshot` and `timestamp` should be stored on a USB stick (used solely for this purpose).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- TUF keys for `targets`, `snapshot`, and `timestamp` should be stored on a USB stick (used solely for this purpose).
```

- The keys are stored encrypted with a passphrase stored in 1Password (on a private vault).

### Sync Fleet's TUF repository

> For simplicity we sync the repository to the USB stick.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For simplicity, we sync the repository to the USB stick.
```

```sh
cd /Volumes/FLEET-TUF/repository

cd /Volumes/FLEET-TUF
mkdir -p repository
mkdir -p keys
mkdir -p staged

aws s3 sync s3://fleet-tuf-repo ./repository
```

### Generate targets+snapshot+timestamp keys

All commands shown in this guide are executed from `/Volumes/FLEET-TUF`:
```sh
cd /Volumes/FLEET-TUF
```

```sh
tuf gen-key targets
Enter targets keys passphrase:
Repeat targets keys passphrase:
Generated targets key with ID ae943cb8be8a849b37c66ed46bdd7e905ba3118c0c051a6ee3cd30625855a076
```
```sh
tuf gen-key snapshot
Enter snapshot keys passphrase:
Repeat snapshot keys passphrase:
Generated snapshot key with ID 1a4d9beb826d1ff4e036d757cfcd6e36d0f041e58d25f99ef3a20ae3f8dd71e3
```
```sh
tuf gen-key timestamp
Enter timestamp keys passphrase:
Repeat timestamp keys passphrase:
Generated timestamp key with ID d940df08b59b12c30f95622a05cc40164b78a11dd7d408395ee4f79773331b30
```

> Share `staged/root.json` with Fleet member with the `root` role, who will sign with its root key and push to the repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Share `staged/root.json` with a Fleet member with the `root` role, who will sign with their root key and push to the repository.
```

### Root role signs the `staged/root.json`

> Essentially the following commands are executed to sign the new keys:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Essentially, the following commands are executed to sign the new keys:
```

- `tuf sign`
- `tuf snapshot`
- `tuf timestamp`
- `tuf commit`

## Pushing new updates

> Following are tested steps to push new targets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following are tested steps to push new targets.
```

> ### 1. Backup current TUF repository

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 1. Back up current TUF repository
```

Just in case we break the remote TUF directory, let's do a local backup:
```sh
mkdir ~/tuf.fleetctl.com/backup
aws s3 sync s3://fleet-tuf-repo ~/tuf.fleetctl.com/backup
```

> ### 2. Make sure the local repository is up-to-date

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 2. Make sure the local repository is up to date
```

```sh
aws s3 sync s3://fleet-tuf-repo ./repository
```

> ### 3. Setup Orbit in Linux, Windows, macOS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 3. Set up Orbit in Linux, Windows, and macOS
```

Install Orbit with the (to be updated) channels in the three supported OSs.

> E.g. if we need to push a new version of `osqueryd` to `edge`, then generate and install a package with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if we need to push a new version of `osqueryd` to `edge`, then generate and install a package with:
```

```sh
fleetctl package ... --osqueryd-channel=edge ...
```

> ### 4. Setup Orbit in one host that points to our repository

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 4. Set up Orbit in one host that points to our repository
```

> This allows us to verify that already running clients will upgrade successfully.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This lets us verify that currently running clients will upgrade successfully.
```

Serve current unmodified repository:
```sh
cd repository && python3 -m http.server
```

> Generate packages using the local TUF server (in my case on a macOS host):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generate packages using the local TUF server (in my case, on a macOS host):
```

```sh
fleetctl package --type=pkg --update-url=http://localhost:8000 ...
[...]
```

Install generated `fleet-osquery.pkg`.

### 5. Actually pushing new updates

> In this example we are promoting orbit from `edge` to `stable`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, we're promoting orbit from `edge` to `stable`:
```

```sh
./fleetctl-macos updates add --target ./repository/targets/orbit/linux/edge/orbit --platform linux --name orbit --version 1.1.0 -t 1.1 -t 1 -t stable
[...]
./fleetctl-macos updates add --target ./repository/targets/orbit/windows/edge/orbit.exe --platform windows --name orbit --version 1.1.0 -t 1.1 -t 1 -t stable
[...]
./fleetctl-macos updates add --target ./repository/targets/orbit/macos/edge/orbit --platform macos --name orbit --version 1.1.0 -t 1.1 -t 1 -t stable
[...]
```

> `--dryrun` allows us to verify the upgrade before pushing:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`--dryrun` lets us verify the upgrade before pushing:
```

(dryrun) upload: repository/targets/orbit/linux/stable/orbit to s3://fleet-tuf-repo/targets/orbit/linux/stable/orbit
(dryrun) upload: repository/targets/orbit/macos/1.1.0/orbit to s3://fleet-tuf-repo/targets/orbit/macos/1.1.0/orbit
(dryrun) upload: repository/targets/orbit/macos/1.1/orbit to s3://fleet-tuf-repo/targets/orbit/macos/1.1/orbit
(dryrun) upload: repository/targets/orbit/macos/1/orbit to s3://fleet-tuf-repo/targets/orbit/macos/1/orbit
(dryrun) upload: repository/targets/orbit/macos/stable/orbit to s3://fleet-tuf-repo/targets/orbit/macos/stable/orbit
(dryrun) upload: repository/targets/orbit/windows/1.1.0/orbit.exe to s3://fleet-tuf-repo/targets/orbit/windows/1.1.0/orbit.exe
(dryrun) upload: repository/targets/orbit/windows/1.1/orbit.exe to s3://fleet-tuf-repo/targets/orbit/windows/1.1/orbit.exe
(dryrun) upload: repository/targets/orbit/windows/1/orbit.exe to s3://fleet-tuf-repo/targets/orbit/windows/1/orbit.exe
(dryrun) upload: repository/targets/orbit/windows/stable/orbit.exe to s3://fleet-tuf-repo/targets/orbit/windows/stable/orbit.exe
(dryrun) upload: repository/timestamp.json to s3://fleet-tuf-repo/timestamp.json
```

> In this other example we are updating osquery's `edge` channel:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, we're updating osquery's `edge` channel:
```

```sh
./fleetctl-macos updates add --target /Users/luk/Downloads/tuf-osqueryd/osqueryd.exe --platform windows --name osqueryd --version 5.5.1 -t edge
[...]
./fleetctl-macos updates add --target /Users/luk/Downloads/tuf-osqueryd/osqueryd.app.tar.gz --platform macos-app --name osqueryd --version 5.5.1 -t edge
[...]
./fleetctl-macos updates add --target /Users/luk/Downloads/tuf-osqueryd/osqueryd --platform linux --name osqueryd --version 5.5.1 -t edge
[...]
```

> `--dryrun` allows us to verify the upgrade before pushing:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`--dryrun` lets us verify the upgrade before pushing:
```

```sh
aws s3 sync ./repository s3://fleet-tuf-repo --profile tuf --dryrun
(dryrun) upload: repository/snapshot.json to s3://fleet-tuf-repo/snapshot.json
(dryrun) upload: repository/targets.json to s3://fleet-tuf-repo/targets.json
(dryrun) upload: repository/targets/osqueryd/linux/5.5.1/osqueryd to s3://fleet-tuf-repo/targets/osqueryd/linux/5.5.1/osqueryd
(dryrun) upload: repository/targets/osqueryd/linux/edge/osqueryd to s3://fleet-tuf-repo/targets/osqueryd/linux/edge/osqueryd
(dryrun) upload: repository/targets/osqueryd/macos-app/5.5.1/osqueryd.app.tar.gz to s3://fleet-tuf-repo/targets/osqueryd/macos-app/5.5.1/osqueryd.app.tar.gz
(dryrun) upload: repository/targets/osqueryd/macos-app/edge/osqueryd.app.tar.gz to s3://fleet-tuf-repo/targets/osqueryd/macos-app/edge/osqueryd.app.tar.gz
(dryrun) upload: repository/targets/osqueryd/windows/5.5.1/osqueryd.exe to s3://fleet-tuf-repo/targets/osqueryd/windows/5.5.1/osqueryd.exe
(dryrun) upload: repository/targets/osqueryd/windows/edge/osqueryd.exe to s3://fleet-tuf-repo/targets/osqueryd/windows/edge/osqueryd.exe
(dryrun) upload: repository/timestamp.json to s3://fleet-tuf-repo/timestamp.json
```

> ### 6. Verify the already running test host

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 6. Verify the currently running test host
```

> Verify host enrolled in step (4) upgraded to the new versions successfully.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Verify the host enrolled in step 4 upgraded to the new versions successfully.
```

### 7. Verify generation of new packages

```sh
fleetctl package --type=pkg --update-url=http://localhost:8000 ...
fleetctl package --type=msi --update-url=http://localhost:8000 ...
fleetctl package --type=deb --update-url=http://localhost:8000 ...
```

### 8. Push!

Run the same command shown above, but without `--dryrun`
```sh
aws s3 sync ./repository s3://fleet-tuf-repo --profile tuf
```

> ### 9. Final Verification

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 9. Final verification
```

> Now that the repository is pushed, verify that the hosts enrolled in step (3) update as expected. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that the repository has been pushed, verify that the hosts enrolled in step 3 update as expected. 
```

### Issues found

#### Invalid timestamp.json version

> The following issue was solved by resigning the timestamp metadata `fleetctl updates timestamp` (executed three times to increase the version to 4175)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following issue was solved by resigning the timestamp metadata `fleetctl updates timestamp` (executed three times to increase the version to 4175).
```

```sh
2022-08-23T13:44:48-03:00 INF update failed error="update metadata: update metadata: tuf: failed to decode timestamp.json: version 4172 is lower than current version 4174"
2022-08-23T13:59:48-03:00 INF update failed error="update metadata: update metadata: tuf: failed to decode timestamp.json: version 4172 is lower than current version 4174"
```

## Notes

> - "Measure thrice cut once": Steps 3, 4, 5 and 6 allows us to verify the repository is in good shape before pushing to [Fleet's TUF service](tuf.fleetctl.com).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Measure thrice, cut once: Steps 3, 4, 5, and 6 let us verify the repository is in good shape before pushing to [Fleet's TUF service](tuf.fleetctl.com).
```
